---
layout: post
title: "Learning vs Doing"
date: 2015-12-19 16:05:20 -0600
comments: true
categories: [life, learning, pair programming, collaboration, growing up, personalities, job]
---

The goal of my first project at my first "real" job is to get something useful
done within a few days and start to feel like a contributing member of the
team. However it has been about a week, and I still have not finished that
project.

From my experience talking with some of my colleagues so far, their collective
attitude might be summed up with, "Google it, then copy-paste it, but don't
worry about what it does." In my life, I have worked with and met _many_ people
having that attitude. Partially because of my experience working with those
people, it happens to decidedly _not_ be _my_ attitude. My attitude is more
like "google it, learn what to do, learn why that is the right approach, take
notes, and then copy-paste and modify the best solution to make the final
solution as clean as possible." This strategy got me through many tough
situations, so I have built up faith in it.

So, after seeing me spend _days_ learning about ssh tunnelling, ansible, and
vagrant -- and not finishing my simple project -- they finally said something
along the lines of

> At this rate it will take you weeks to learn how to automate deployment of a
> virtual machine. Why don't you just deploy _one_ copy and then learn about
> how to automate it on your _own_ time?

Now, "weeks" is probably an overstatement, but they pointed out to me that I
had sort of assumed out of nowhere that I was hired as some sort of devops role
for the company, even though what I'm actually interested in is what one might
call "big data engineering". They said, "_If_ you find yourself repeating the
same tasks over and over, _then_ you should learn to automate them." It is now
obvious that they are in the right.

At the time, I was startled by the way they approached me about what I consider
to be largely a difference in personalities. But I can see that they are
concerned that someone who reads too much never gets anything done, and so far
I have fit that stereotype. At the same time, I am concerned that a person who
_doesn't_ read will do their work quickly and incorrectly and will then spend
the next few weeks rejiggering a broken project, and so far they have fit that
stereotype. In short, it seems that we are all prejudiced and have plenty to
learn from each other.

Going forward I shall take their advice and do the more mundane tasks as fast
as possible and only learn things that come up more than once. If that doesn't
work out for me because I'm just cranking out shitty work, I will revert back
to understanding what I am doing.
