---
layout: post
title: "Asking for advice"
date: 2016-02-27 15:38:06 -0800
comments: true
categories: [life, advice, work, school, family, friends, colleagues, improvement]
---

There are many circumstances in life during which one may feel the need to ask
for advice. For example, when evaluating a significant decision, or when
dealing with an emotionally stressful circumstance. Here, I will discuss
advice about significant decisions.

In giving advice, everyone has a different approach. I generally try to follow
a line I heard in a rap song by The Streets, "If you never tell a lie to her,
you don't have to remember anything." In other words, lying will only
complicate your life because you have to remember the lies you made up.
(Caveat: this may not always the best way to go for emotionally complex
issues.) I also enjoy helping people rationally and realistically evaluate
their options for significant decisions, and surely if someone recalls that
your input was helpful in the past, they will be more likely to ask you in the
future.

Most people I know don't seem to like giving useful advice. It seems they
either are (1) too afraid that their honesty will lead you to dislike them, or
(2) they feel so stressed with their own issues that taking on yours for a few
minutes would be overwhelming, or (3) they find your problem uninteresting and
simply have better things to do.

But some people are the opposite. They will patiently listen to your question
and give what they feel to be an honest evaluation of where you stand and what
you should do. The advice of people in this category will often be heavily and
obviously biased by their own experience and ideology. This is simply a
symptom of "being honest".

So if you want good advice, it would be ideal to find someone who is honest,
not stressed about a similar problem to yours, as well as interested in and
knowledgeable of the subject; they should generally also be disinterested in
your particular problem. However, this ideal candidate is not always
available.

<!-- more -->

In that case one can obviously try the timeless "pros vs cons" list, which
doesn't necessarily rely on external sources of wisdom, but often external
sources of wisdom are critical. One can ask unideal candidates for advice, and
maybe they'll at least have some curt nugget that has some use. That's what I
usually do, and it is generally not effective at all, but occasionaly that
curt nugget is exactly the required pithy jewel.

One can consult the Internet, but I kind of assumed that if you needed advice,
you already checked the Internet for answers. But to go one step further you
can *ask* the Internet, treating it like this all knowing Oracle. This will
work to varying degrees depending on your problem. If your problem is one that
everyone and their mother has an opinion on, you will end up sifting through
junk answers, and may or may not get anything useful. In that case, the more
details you can reveal, the more benefit you will obtain. Of course *where*
you ask matters: for example Quora will be more effective than Yahoo Answers.
If your problem is esoteric, _find the people who are into that thing_.

For example, I have noticed to my surprise that StackOverflow/StackExchange is
not always the best place for all programming-related questions, because if
your question is esoteric to one technological ecosystem, the question-
answering population on StackOverflow won't necessarily have the flag-bearers
of the cause of that particular ecosystem. But if it really is an ecosystem,
it will have a place where the flag-bearers dwell, so _find it_ and they will
probably help. In my experience, IRC channels tend to be empty; Gitter
channels may be well-attended; Github issues get a lot of flak for being a
mess, but are often effective if you're sure your question isn't stupid;
mailing lists can be high-latency but that's often where the true experts of
super-technical projects converse. Following **good forum-question-asking
practices** is _crucial_ in _any_ of these environments, and it can be
trickier to do that than it sounds. __The better you phrase your question, the
more appealing it is to answer in the eyes of a high-quality potential source
of advice.__

Sometimes the advice you receive from multiple sources will be in direct
conflict with each other. I have been having this issue a lot lately. Let's
say one person suggested I do `A`, and another suggested I do `not A`. I have
decided this pair of suggestions implies that _either_ decision is just fine,
which is basically the ideal outcome; viz. my so-called "significant decision"
was not so significant after all and doesn't not need to be balanced
carefully.

Just some biased thoughts from my experience; take some, leave some, etc.
