---
layout: post
title: "The tone makes the point"
date: 2016-01-07 08:40:04 -0800
comments: true
categories: [Paul Graham, essay, argument, persuation, economics, politics, society, taxes]
---

Recently, hot-shot investor Paul Graham wrote a [piece about economic
inequality][ineq]. This essay provoked a lot of dialogue online. I read the
piece, and a few responses to it. I enjoyed the essay, and I found it very
persuasive. In fact, I would say my 'opinion on the matter' has been changed by
reading the essay and its accompanying summary by the author. The responses I
read were also very interesting. They were from seemingly center-left-wing
individuals like myself, only they were _not_ persuaded by Graham's arguments.

My point here is not so much to discuss the piece, as the tone of the piece.
This piece was written with a tone that raises the hair on the back of the
necks of liberals. This may have been unintentional on the part of Graham,
...although considering the follow-up discussions of his previous piece on
females in tech, may he just likes raising those particular hairs (they're
called "hackles").

[ineq]: http://www.paulgraham.com/ineq.html

<!-- more -->

I will now summarize what I took from the essay. Technology increases the
potential productivity of people at an exponential rate. Since some people do
not become more productive, this correspondingly increases the _variability_ of
productivity within the population. Those who are more productive in producing
innovative goods are benefitting society. They mainly only are interested in
being more productive _because_ of the possibility of getting rich off of it.
If we want to help the poor, the problem is _not_ that there are rich people;
the problem is that there are poor people. To help the poor, instead of taking
away the ability for the productive to get rich, we should help the poor become
more productive. This is because economic inequality _per se_ is not the issue,
poverty is.

For me, this is, as I've mentioned, both convincing and enlightening. But there
are two concerns any left-winger is almost certainly going to bring up. First,
a lot of people's wealth is not made by being productive in a way that benefits
society; shouldn't we wage class-war against them? Second, even people who
became rich by benefitting society, are likely to abuse their wealth via some
form of corruption, so that's why we should prevent them from getting rich in
the first place. After those two arguments, there are a few other popular
rebuttals. (E.g.) Third, why should we allow some people to be _that_ much
richer than everyone else; something about it seems creepy, therefore it should
be prevented.

These _are_ legitimate concerns, they just don't _actually_ rebut anything
Graham was saying. That's why, if Graham wants to have a legitimate
conversation with people who are going to make the above rebuttals, his
argument should _start_ by saying that those rebuttals are _correct_, and then
go into how it is _still_ the case that his original arguments are correct. In
this way, the hackles are down, and the legitimate points can be heard.

However, maybe Graham wasn't writing the essay for left-wing people to be
convinced. Maybe he was trying to convince right-wing people. If that is true,
the essay was pointless, because right-wing people _already_ agree with the
opinions he stated. Or maybe he was writing the essay for maximum "virality" to
increase his fame and international mindshare. In that case, I'm not a good
judge of effective argument technique.
